# Language Definitions

The following languages are included with `illuminate-js` :

<div class='langauge-list'>

!!!include(./pages/languages.md)!!!

</div>

## How to write a language definition?

Every language is defined as an [ES6 Map](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Map)
of `Tokens`, as shown below:

```ts
interface TokenObject {
    pattern: RegExp;
    inside?: Definition;
    lookbehind?: boolean;
    greedy?: boolean;
    alias?: string;
}

type Tokens = RegExp | TokenObject | Array<RegExp | TokenObject>;

type Definition = Map<string, Tokens | Map<string, Tokens>>;
```

**Note**: Since, there is non-zero probability that a given `RegExp` can match some unintended string, the order of `Tokens` is important, hence we use `Map`.

Using a `RegExp`, is the simplest way to express a token. Alternatively, you can use `TokenObject`,
where the `RegExp` describing the token would be `pattern` attribute.

```ts
{
    tokenname: /regexp/;
}
// is same as
{
    tokenname: {
        pattern: /regexp/;
    }
}
```

But, the `TokenObject` notation allows for additional options to be specified:

<div class='docs'>

### inside

This property takes another `Definition`. It is useful when you want to highlight the nested content. This is useful for certain languages, but they are slower and if are not coded properly, can even lead to infinite recursion. For example, this can be used highlight JS within [JS template literals](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Template_literals), or highlight CSS and JS within HTML `style` and `script` tags respectively.

### lookbehind

This option mitigates JavaScript’s lack of lookbehind. When set to `true`, the first capturing group in the regex pattern is discarded, so it effectively behaves as if it was lookbehind. For an example of this, check out the `comment` token from C-like language definition:

```ts
[
    'comment',
    [
        {
            pattern: \/(^|[^\\\\])\\\/\\*[\\s\\S]*?(?:\\*\\\/|$)\/,
            lookbehind: true
        },
        {
            pattern: \/(^|[^\\\\:])\\\/\\\/.*\/,
            lookbehind: true
        }
    ]
];
```

### alias

This option can be used to define one or more aliases for the matched token. The result will be, that the classnames of the token and its aliases are combined. This can be useful, to combine the styling of a well known token, which is already supported by most of the themes, with a semantically correct token name. The option can be set to a `string` or an `Array<string>`. In the following example the token name `scalar` is not supported by any theme, but it will be highlighted the same as a `string`.

```ts
[
    'scalar',
    {
        pattern: \/([\\-:]\\s*(?:![^\\s]+)?[ \\t]*[|>])[ \\t]*(?:((?:\\r?\\n|\\r)[ \\t]+)[^\\r\\n]+(?:\\2[^\\r\\n]+)*)\/,
        lookbehind: true,
        alias: 'string'
    }
];
```

### greedy

This is a `boolean` attribute. It is intended to solve a common problem with patterns that match long strings like comments, regex or string literals. For example, comments are parsed first, but if the string `/* foo */` appears inside a string, you would not want it to be highlighted as a comment. The `greedy`-property allows a pattern to ignore previous matches of other patterns, and overwrite them when necessary. Use this flag with restraint, as it incurs a small performance overhead. The following example demonstrates its usage:

```ts
[
    'string',
    {
        pattern: \/(["'])(\\\\(?:\\r\\n|[\\s\\S])|(?!\\1)[^\\\\\\r\\n])*\\1\/,
        greedy: true
    }
];
```

<br/>

In most languages there are multiple different ways of declaring the same constructs (e.g. comments, strings, ...) and sometimes it is difficult or unpractical to match all of them with one single regular expression. To add multiple regular expressions for one token name an `Array<Regexp | TokenObject>` can be used:

```ts
'tokenname': [ \/regex0\/, \/regex1\/, { pattern: \/regex2\/ } ]
```

A `Definition` has a reserved key `rest`, that accepts another `Definition`. This will merge this `Definition` to the end of the current `Definition`. This is useful for referring to tokens defined elsewhere. For an example where `rest` is useful, for using JavaScript tokens inside `template-string`:

```ts
[
    'template-string',
    {
        pattern: \/`(?:\\\\[\\s\\S]|[^\\`])*`\/,
        greedy: true,
        inside: new Map<string, Tokens>([
            [
                'interpolation',
                {
                    pattern: \/\\$\\{[^}]+\\}\/,
                    inside: new Map<string, Tokens | Map<string, Tokens>>([
                        [
                            'interpolation-punctuation',
                            {
                                pattern: \/^\\$\\{|\\}$\/,
                                alias: 'punctuation'
                            }
                        ],
                        ['rest', clone(javascript)]
                    ])
                }
            ],
            ['string', \/[\\s\\S]+\/]
        ])
    }
];
```

</div>

## Helper utils for writing language definitions

TODO

<div class='docs'>

### clone(def: Definition): Definition

### insertBefore(parent: Definition, insertBeforeKey: string, def: Definition): Definition

### setIn(def: any, path: Array<string>, value: any): void

### getIn(def: any, path: Array<string>): any

</div>

<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
